Towards the end of the previous video, I mentioned a few situations in which gradient descent might
not give us the correct solution or even a good solution.
In this video, I'm going to talk specifically about local minima and what local minima are, why they
are a problem for gradient descent algorithm in general, and why it's actually difficult to know whether
this is a really serious issue in deep learning.
Not a serious issue for the gradient descent algorithm, but whether this local minimum issue is really
a problem specifically in the context of deep learning.
So just to review a little bit of what I said in the previous video, gradient descent is guaranteed
to go downhill, meaning down the error landscape.
However, simply going downhill does not guarantee that we will find the correct or even a good solution.
Gradient descent can get stuck in local minima if the parameters are not set right, or if we happen
to start off at unfortunate starting point.
And you know when you're working in one dimension or two dimensions, it's not really an issue because
you can just look, you can graph the error landscape and you can see whether we've gotten the right
solution or a wrong solution.
However, when you get to larger dimensions, more than two dimensions and you will start seeing when
we get to deep learning, you know, in the next section, these models get to be really high parameter
dimensional.
So these error landscapes can be in like a 10 million dimensional space.
It is absolutely impossible to visualize them accurately and fully.
So that suggests that local minimum is going to be a serious problem.
So what are local minimum?
Well here we have a function.
This is our error function.
And again the idea is that the deep learning model will be most accurate.
It will perform at its best when the errors are minimized.
So so we want to find the parameters that give us that get us all the way down here in the error landscape.
So this would be called a global minimum.
But you can also see we have some other minima here.
These are called local minima.
Now we can kind of distinguish between these two.
We might I might call this a bad local minimum.
And this one is kind of a good local minimum.
These are not formal technical terms.
But I think you can see that this is not the best solution, but it's still relatively good because
we still are getting a small error, even though it's not the best solution.
This solution is much worse.
Now why do we even get stuck?
Why does gradient descent get stuck in these minima?
Well, remember, the gradient descent algorithm is always going to move in the direction of the negative
derivative.
So let's say we start here.
Now the derivative is negative.
So that means we move positive on the x axis here.
So the derivative is negative we're moving positive.
The derivative is negative we're moving positive here the derivative is positive.
So that means if we end up here the derivative is positive we're actually going to go to the left.
So we're going to get into this point here where as the model goes over here the derivative is negative.
So we move to the right.
Here the derivative is positive.
So we move to the left and we get stuck in this local minimum.
It's hard to break out of this local minimum because we are just you know, as soon as it gets to this
side of this local minimum, it starts going back to the left according to the gradient descent algorithm.
Okay.
And this is the global minimum.
This is the point we actually want to reach.
now again, this is a one dimensional function, so we can simply visualize it.
We can look at it.
And if the model ends up here we can say, okay, you know the model didn't do didn't get the right
solution.
But in high dimensional space, we cannot visualize this error landscape in its full high dimensional
representation.
So you might think it's natural to think that this is like fatal for deep learning.
How can deep learning possibly work when we have no idea if we're getting trapped in a local minimum?
Well, you know, the enormous, incredible success of deep learning actually suggests that this isn't
really a huge problem.
And I will this is going to be a running theme of this course that the incredible success of deep learning
and how exactly deep learning works remains a mystery.
It's still a bit mysterious.
Nobody really understands why deep learning works so well.
People can tell you all sorts of things.
We can come up with intuitive explanations, but the true underlying success of deep learning is a little
bit mysterious.
So that already suggests that local minima are not such a huge problem.
Um, two possible solutions here, which I will.
I'm going to graph both of these on the next couple slides to give them some visual context.
So it is possible that there are many good solutions.
That means many equally good local minima.
And this interpretation, this is a possibility I don't know.
Nobody knows if this is really true.
This interpretation is consistent with the fact that you can get models with very, very different weights,
performing equally well on solving problems and getting high accuracy with very, very different weights.
So that is to say, models that deep learning models that look very different from each other have very
different weights from each other, still perform equally well.
That suggests that there may be many good solutions that are distinct from each other.
Another possibility is that there are actually extremely few local minima in the high dimensional space.
So what we think is a problem from looking at these error functions in one dimension or two dimensions,
maybe you get to these very high dimensional spaces and there's actually very, very, very few real
local minima.
And this interpretation is consistent with the complexity.
And I call this the absurd dimensionality of deep learning models.
In fact, you know, modern deep learning models will have billions and billions of parameters, which
means these the dimensionality of the error space is in the billions.
Okay.
So to make these two possibilities more clear, I'm going to visualize these.
So this is the first possibility that the error landscape might look something like this where there
is a global minimum.
I think I drew it so that this one is the global minimum.
But you can see these are all local minima that are all distinct but really, really good.
They all minimize the error pretty much equally well.
And here you know here we have a problematic case with a bad local minimum.
These are equally good but distinct minima.
So this is a possibility.
Or it's possible that there actually aren't so many local minima in high dimensions.
So here we have a two dimensional function.
This is graphed as a surface.
And I graphed it as a surface to make it clear that there is a something called a saddle point here
in the middle.
Now for a local minimum in one dimension, it just has to dip down like this.
This is a local minimum.
In higher dimensional space, a local minimum has to be a minimum in every single direction.
So in fact when we look at this graph, there are no real local minima in this function that we can
see with these x with this axis range here.
So for example here we look across this dimension.
Maybe this is x and this is y.
So we look along the x dimension.
And here at this slice here this slice shows a local minimum.
Here's the local minimum.
But what's the model going to do when it gets here.
What is gradient descent going to do.
Well gradient descent doesn't see that this is a local minimum.
This is only a local minimum in one direction.
The other direction here maybe this is the Y direction.
This direction is actually not a local minima.
In fact it's a local maximum.
So in fact this is not a local minimum here.
And we actually don't even see any local minima anywhere on this surface, anywhere in this function,
at least not within this range.
So this is referred to as a saddle point.
A saddle point is where a function has a minimum in one direction and a maximum in another direction.
So again, this is two dimensional, but in deep learning we deal with much higher dimensions.
So what does this mean.
Well this means that gradient descent gets trapped.
It gets stuck in a local minimum only if that minimum if that point is a minimum in all dimensions.
So if we have a model with 400,000 parameters then we are working with an error landscape.
An error function in a 4000 dimensional space and a local minimum has to be the minimum.
The derivative has to be zero in all 400,000 of those dimensions.
And you know how many of those actually are there?
How many local minima are there in a 400,000 dimensional space?
Well, it's hard to know for sure, but it's pretty unlikely that every single direction, all 400,000
directions have a minimum, all at the same exact point.
So therefore it's possible that in extremely high dimensional space there are actually very few local
minima.
So therefore, maybe local minima aren't such a problem for the gradient descent algorithm.
In the context of deep learning where we have very rich dimensional spaces.
Okay, but as I mentioned before, we don't really know whether we are getting stuck in a local minimum.
It's hard to know for sure.
So what to do about it?
Well, for one thing, when the model performance is good, you just don't worry about it, you know?
And when things are going well, you don't have to worry about these potential problems like local minima.
Otherwise, there are a few possible solutions for local minima.
One is to retrain the model many times using different random starting weights.
So different starting locations on the Lost Landscape.
And then you go through all of the different.
Maybe you run the model 20 times and you look through the performance from all 20 models, and you pick
the model that does best.
Another possible solution is to increase the dimensionality of the error landscape, which in the context
of deep learning, means to have a model with more parameters.
So you make the model a little bit more complex with the idea that it's going to have fewer local minima.
So in this video, I told you about local minima and why local minimum can be problematic for the gradient
descent algorithm.
And then we also discussed that it's kind of hard to know whether the local weather, local minima is
really a serious issue for deep learning.
And I talked about possible ways that it might not be a serious issue, and what to do when you think
you have some when you're getting stuck in local minima.